author and psychedelic exploit Chris
Bosch once again see documented the
insights from 73 high dose LSD sessions
conducted over the course of 20 years
during upon his training as a
philosopher of religion and following
protocols established by stanislav grof
chris went on a life-changing journey to
explore his mind what he discovered drew
mminton deep communion with cosmic
consciousness Chris Bosh is professor
emeritus in the Department of Philosophy
and religious studies a Youngstown State
University where he taught for 33 years
chris is also adjunct faculty at
California Institute of integral studies
and a fellow at the Institute of noetic
Sciences an award-winning teacher Chris
work Chris's work explores the
philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
especially psychedelic states chris has
written four books life's cycles a study
of reincarnation and light of
contemporary consciousness research dark
night early dawn a pioneering work and
cyclic philosophy and collective
consciousness and the living classroom
an exploration of teaching and
collective fields of consciousness in
his new book LSD and the mind of the
universe which I must say is absolutely
brilliant and seems to be getting really
good reception with everyone I know
that's that's reading it it is a dream
poem of as you said the the deeper
states that LSD gives us access to it
was a quite an adventure of quite a long
and interesting journey how long did it
take you to write because there's
obviously years of nights and well yeah
I had years of notes and all the in the
20 years that I did the work and then I
digested that material for more years
and then I I condensed my sessions took
notes and condensed them and got
prepared and once I actually started
writing it took five years okay this was
a long project I think it really
highlights the importance
of some type of integration you being a
writer obviously that's your modality of
integration others it's our fathers it's
music but yeah it really highlights the
importance of finding a way of making
sense of these experiences after the
facts and I remember you know reading in
the book that you would take the time to
write as soon as possible after such an
experience and to use the music that you
had played during the sessions as a
trigger as a mimetic device to or
mmm-morning device yeah
- yeah those emotions which can often
get lost in the cloud of the intensity
of this yeah let me just mention
something about the method just give a
context because that was an important
aid in solving a problem the challenging
with work doing the work the way that I
did what I did was to work after three
medium dos sessions always following
Stan Grof protocol so I was always
totally isolated always working with the
sitter always working with eyeshades and
a music totally internalized sessions
after three preliminary sessions I did
all the rest of the sessions seventy
three sessions total high-dose sessions
so I was working it essentially I aimed
at 600 micrograms so between 500 and 600
micrograms so when you're working with
dose is that high and you're going is
deep in cereal sessions over many years
Recall becomes a serious issue because
you're just pushing the boundaries of
consciousness so deeply so I found that
to record the sessions it was important
to record them within 24 hours and
recording them often had be writing at
the very edges of my comprehension
because I was trying to describe
experiences that were deeply mysterious
to me at the time so I found it was a
help if I listen to the music that was
played in the session in exactly the
order in which was played and I would
play
music over and over again while I was
trying to record the session after the
day after and then when I was done with
that section I'd go on to the next piece
of music all the way through
well that really you know because the
day after a session you're kind of
hoarse around the edges but your verbal
functions are back so you're in one foot
in one foot out and I found by listening
to the music I could get into a state
where I called it's standing at the edge
of the well where I could basically get
back in the edge of it and enough that I
could get it down on paper yeah it's
still a Scylla liminal space yes I
remember I remember writing that some of
the things you've written down during
the station that might have been like
reality is which at the time can be so
profound and meaningful and you read him
begging you
of course it is it's always yeah sifting
through that stuff to give you things
that can really be applied in general
general I I didn't try to make notes or
record anything during the session
itself because I was so far removed that
you know I just wasn't even in touch
with my own body let alone with anything
going on in the room interesting because
instead something I'm thinking a bit
about recently is recording stations in
the moment particularly with by Vimeo
DMZ and Toad medicine because people
seem to be channeling stuff things are
coming through languages and mm-hmm
boys Asians that are quite simply out of
this world
mm-hmm there is almost no way of
recollecting afterwards and so there
does to be some merit and recording and
the moments to carry out things that
might come through when your vessel is
empty and then maybe it may vary by
substance and agenda the the quirks the
tricky part about the five améo
experience is how
fast it is it's short and it's
incredibly fast and the LSD experience
is very very long it's it's an
eight-hour window so it each of them hos
distinct challenges for recall and
integration as it is June a clickable
across all all psychics and medicines I
think they all have their own unique
challenges the following graphs protocol
once I guess the key equation to begin
with is what made you decide to do such
large doses given that thanks do you
know what and it's part of going yeah
well you know in stands early work he
clearly differentiates between
psycholytic or low dose therapy and
psychedelic high dose therapy and the
protocol for psychedelic therapy was
they developed this in Spring Grove
hospital and they were trying to trigger
a near-death episode experience with
patients who were terminally ill so and
it was limited to three sessions I
thought well if you could go into
high-dose session space three times you
could do it more times if you could do
it safely three times you could do it
safely multiple times and I guess in the
beginning I did high-dose session simply
because it was hard to find time to do
sessions in a dual career marriage and
soon there were children involved just
together in both of our schedules to get
a day where we could give the entire day
over to this work and so I thought I was
still thinking in terms of a personal
model of therapeutic engagement so all
the eastern sources that I had you know
I'm professor of religious studies
teachers from religion psychology of
religion and these Eastern sources
basically said your karma is ultimately
finite over even with many lifetimes
your karma is finite and I thought that
I could just work through mine faster by
working with high doses I knew the
sessions would be hard but I thought if
I could just stay grounded and stay
focused and confronting the shadow I
could just work through my shadow
asked her that way eventually that that
whole protocol was shattered when I
began to realize that what was happening
in my sessions went far beyond anything
that concerned only my personal psyche
and my personal karma my personal soul
and then after that point sorry that
when we at the point of the ocean of
suffering that you experienced where
yeah was what honestly had to read that
that examines of the entire collective
human pain throughout all of history
yeah yeah it is hard to read I had to
really give some careful thought of how
much to expose that because I know it's
challenging for readers to go into that
material but just to finish out other
topic even once I let go of that
personal model I found that I developed
I liked where the high dose work took me
and it took me farther than I imagined
and I developed a taste for it now I
don't recommend this protocol I really
don't I would do it differently if I
were doing it over again today I would
be much gentler on myself I would
balance high dose work with low dose
work I would violence LSD with
psilocybin ayahuasca more organic
psychedelics but at the time I mean this
was really I started in 79 so I did this
work between 79 and 99 when I was 30 to
50 years old so at the time well I just
I ended up pushing myself harder than I
would recommend other people to push
themselves it's really not necessary
I also miss the growth in the book too
which is good now yeah yeah I thought
that the goal was to get somewhere you
know to get to some end point that would
be enlightenment or oneness with God or
the primal void and I came to realize
that that was a naive expectation late I
mean 50 sessions in I had experience
which convinced me that the universe is
infinite and the divine is infinite well
it's not a matter of getting to the end
or some ultimate state it's a matter of
opening ourselves as deeply as we can to
the intelligence of the universe or to
the intelligence of the divine letting
as much of it into us as possible and
stabilizing it as deeply as possible
so you would have known that at least on
a theoretical level from Eastern studies
that environments you know isn't the
destination it's a journey
Jada's at my sounds mm-hmm so you would
have gone to into the stations with that
at least and mind is a conceptual mm-hmm
yeah but I found even even the Eastern
models that I was familiar with and
working with did not encapsulate or did
not profile the full scale of the
experiences that opened in this journey
because I found that yes you can work
through multiple layers of the bardo the
inter the after death States you can go
into extra samsaric reality into
spiritual dimensions beyond the Bardo
but whereas Buddhism particularly which
is kind of the the Eastern traditions
that I was most familiar with and most
comfortable with even that tradition
sort of stops at that point and says it
invokes the grand silence you know when
the Buddha was asked the ultimate
questions he invoked the grand silence
he wouldn't describe it and I found that
there were realities that would open at
that dimension that were just well Shoji
on that grand silence is correlated with
ineffability which is often thrown about
and the psychedelic world particularly
in relation to these large doses and
writing the concept of ineffable
in the boat yeah well as I say in the
book I think ineffability is overrated
yes it's a category I mean it really
comes from William James in discussing
discard one of the qualities of mystical
experiences ineffability and I of course
ultimately our rational mind and our
verbal mind fall silence when
confronting the infinite but I I work
very very hard to put language to things
and I believe in pushing language as far
as humanly possible repeatedly before
surrendering to the ineffable so because
if we if we prioritize ineffability as
one of the primary features of mystical
experience it almost is this is as if
we're saying the divine wants to be not
known in my experience is that the
divine wants to be known and so
ineffability I think often is it's a
symptom of hitting our experiential
limits but if we it when we break into a
new level of consciousness we can't
bring all of it back there are gaps in
my notes and we just can't bring it all
back but I found that if you go back to
that same level of consciousness again
and again and again experiences that
were undigestible or unrecognizable or
ineffable in the beginning become
comprehensible with repetition and with
experience so to me and if you can't say
where you went this is a little harsh
but if you can't say where you went you
probably just got lost and it reminds me
of Makena is saying about bringing back
a middle sized fish no you bring
something back for the community you
know yeah nothing in the realms of
night extraordinary consciousness you
need back something useful otherwise
what's it for at least you can might go
we get back in articulator and express
it and particularly for me that's
creative and even seem to have a real
security about them that you can create
something beautiful the painting or a
sculpture that others can see appreciate
that's one of the Satori gifts to be
able to articulate this like daily
experience and in creative man and
writing certainly falls into that
category yes yeah I found it just takes
time I mean I've really had to sit with
my experience for years and years to
understand in fact it's a general rule
of thumb I would never talk about an
experience on until five years after I'd
had it because it just takes a lot of
time to fully digest and to understand
in fact I had the narrative man had
recorded my experiences all the way
through but I was still learning things
about the journey in the process of
writing the entire journey down yeah
when you start to write things down
other things fall in it so I can create
a space for those perhaps otherwise
forgotten aspects to drop back in and
there's even aspects of this Amazonian
shamanic tradition that say you
shouldn't speak like sharing circles are
not a thing simply because you by
sharing your experience the next morning
it dilutes it yeah I had to really in
Buddhism also one does not speak about
one spiritual experiences except to
one's teacher and I had to sit with that
for a long time because Buddhism is a
you know an important tradition for me
as all the traditional traditions are
but particularly Buddhism and I really
had to ponder whether I should even be
talking about these experiences but in
the end my experience was that the
universe wanted me to share what it was
that she our it had allowed me to
experience I didn't I didn't program my
experiences I didn't choose what I
experienced something else was entirely
in control of my experiences through the
entire journey and at the end you know
the universe made it clear that she said
you didn't give yourself those
experiences we gave you those
experiences those experience Mercer
never meant for you by yourself they
were always meant for you to share with
others and I think we it's basically no
one person's experiences are really
important but when all of our
experiences are shared together in the
circle then we begin to have a deeper
understanding of this mysterious
universe we're exploring yeah and can
build a cultural picture that yeah as a
context for it yeah just you go back
what you said earlier about a few words
to do it game differently that you would
use different plants almost like and you
know different compounds almost like
building a house and use different tools
for different parts of the construction
know do you work with other plants now
or did you end your experiences at this
73 photos positions if they thought much
personal patience yeah no I still use
medicines from time to time them much
less than I used to I mean somewhat it's
a young man's game a young person's game
I'm 70 years old now so if I haven't
learned anything right now yeah yeah so
you know after I stopped my work the LSD
work in 99 and after that from time to
time I would do light sessions or I
would do psilocybin sessions in a few
times ayahuasca sessions or salvia
divinorum so I you know broaden my
experience by working with those
substances but the LSD work was in a
category unto itself and and I found one
of the things I found was that
my body my system was storing energy
over time so when I was doing multiple
sessions my system was storing energy of
those sessions and then using that
stored energy periodically to trigger
breakthroughs into new levels of
consciousness so that I I were to even
take a massive dose of LSD today I would
not be able to get back to where I was
working regularly when I finished my
work in 99 it would take years for me to
develop the the energy the power to be
able to access those deeper dimensions
of the universe my understanding over
time developed was every step into a
deeper level of consciousness is a step
into a higher energy a higher energetic
sate really stood out there long yeah
yeah yeah yeah and if this takes a long
time to develop the power to access
these very very highly energized states
of consciousness mmm and I think that
some working with with integration
particularly with biome you know I
noticed there's a lot people can be
quite depersonalized disassociated after
a very high dose position and one of the
things we advisors embodiment as to
bring that energy back into the body and
to ground the through the earth you know
you know not to go and do meditation
which is going to get you more into the
ethereal realms to bring it back into
the earthly realm almost to discharge
it's like your body becomes a capacitor
for for this energy yeah it's been an
empty vessel to to accept it yeah you're
right I think it was a good good point
to jump into the three other two phases
you spoke about how they're cleansing
and the ecstatic phase yeah basically
working the way I did I found that my
sessions basically had two phases though
at the beginning of every phase there
was some type of intense cleansing or
purification process and if you
surrender to that if I surrender to that
completely that would eventually come
hit a peak threshold and then there
would be some type of death rebirth
process and then the rest of the session
was sent in an ecstatic state in some
type of transcendent experience of some
form or another and that process kept
repeating itself over and over through
the years you know you think I wonder
the nature of the compound itself it's
just the way I see work so there's a
turnaround point halfway at those doses
no I don't think so I think we're
looking at it's one of the dynamics of
consciousness that when you are opening
to deeper levels of consciousness these
deeper levels of consciousness require a
just to enter them triggers a
purification a spontaneous purification
of your of your system purification of
your thoughts of your emotions
purification of your body and so just
when you're when you're entering into
these very very intense very very pure
states of consciousness you just start a
spontaneous detoxification process and
there's so many concepts and belief
systems and emotional complexes that we
all carry that have to be taken apart
have to be undone and if we're going to
experience the universe that deeper
level of cynicism ayahuasca the purges
is very much associated with ayahuasca
but as you point out it it's applicable
to all psychotic medicines in which you
need to remove the blockages in your own
system be they so logical emotional
energetic before you can own happen and
be open to those and so you don't
regulate three factors from those two
phases to
refresh me well which particular ones
are you're plugging into there so
there's the expanding and ecstatic face
with a sliding line between three
functions of the larger Hall which was
influenced by three factors that related
to H planetary sitting yeah and and then
first the the depth of the ecstatic
portion of the session would be was
influenced by several factors as I came
to understand it one of them was the
depth of cleansing that had taken place
in the first part of the session so
usually the deeper the cleansing the
deeper the ecstatic revelation ecstatic
entry the second one was the depth of
cleansing that had taken place in all of
the sessions up to that point in time
so naturally I say in the book you
expect to deeper experience fifty
sessions into a journey then on the
first couple of sessions into a journey
and the third has to do with this energy
quality the quality of the the massive
amounts of energy that's involved so
when you work in serial sessions and I
was doing on average about five sessions
a year so I worked for four years I
stopped for six years
and then I worked for ten years and on
average I was doing about five a year so
when you're working systematically like
that you're taking your body and your
mind into those states it you build up
this energetic momentum it's like an
athlete in training you know the more
you train you build up this this energy
which then carries you through new
performance levels and I think that
happens with the universe to its it
carries you into deeper levels of
consciousness I found that I because
these sessions were so intense and they
were so demanding psychologically and
demanding physically I really had to
prepare myself for days before every
session physically Yoga was chiropractic
wise making
my body was carefully aligned and then
spiritually dietarily spiritually I
would there were certain practices that
I would do before session and other
practices that I would do to integrate
the session afterwards so yeah because
it's just so extremely intense
I was interesting to use the gym breathe
there as well not only deep breaths like
wind like a bandwidth just now just I'm
located woodsy that way yeah well I in
certain specific experiences the the
breath has isn't is a metaphor that
describes the ways in which we connect
with humanity we connect with other
persons we connect with nature we can
enter into states of consciousness or
extremely wide so to speak depth is
something different depth is entering
into contact with deeper levels of
reality other systems of reality other
beings archetype of reality void the
pure void cosmic void types of reality
those are different different categories
of experience hmm okay there might be a
good point to talk about archetypes hmm
well let me just kind of lay out some of
the sequences the the categories and
when I when I got to the end of the
journey well I went through what I
experiences a series of punctuated death
and rebirth experiences so I would break
into a new level of consciousness
I would then stabilize at that level
over multiple sessions and I'd become
more familiar with that level and I'd
get to understand it more and become
more cognitively how it works and
energetically would be purified by the
process of engaging that level of
consciousness and then over time if I
kept pushing I would come to a threshold
and I would go through another death
process and that would drive me into yet
another level of reality and it would
start all over again having to stabilize
my consciousness at that level having to
learn how to manage the the factors at
level so when I got to the end of the
journey and I was looking back I asked
myself well how many levels of
consciousness did I enter how many
fundamental core platforms did I go
through and I basically boiled them down
to five so there was a level of work at
the personal level of consciousness and
then there was a level of work at the
collective level of collective mind
which is where the you know the ocean of
suffering work and where the
purification was really aimed at the
purification of the collective psyche
more than the personal psyche and after
that there was the archetypal dimension
of conscience is entering into
archetypal consciousness and then
entering into oneness our causal
consciousness and then entering finally
into what I called the diamond
luminosity which is what Buddhism was
called dharmakaya a clear light of
absolute reality so for me after I went
through death and rebirth at a personal
level and then after I went through that
took about two years and then after two
years of work at the collective level
working at the in the purification part
working in the ocean of suffering work
and then experiencing successive deeper
initiations into the universe in the
chapter that I call initiation in the
universe then I was spun into archetypal
reality my experience was when I entered
archetypal reality I had the
extraordinary sensation that I was
entering a level of reality that was
more real than time and space was it was
more real than our lives here was and it
it took me a long time you know several
sessions to stabilize and to be able to
enter that level of real
and the nature of death that was
required to enter that reality was
different than ego death I had to
literally die as a human being in order
to enter archetypal reality so I found
that there was a level of identity that
we all have as human beings it's our
it's our humaneness it's our human
identity that's deeper than our personal
identity and the human identity had to
die in order to function at a level of
consciousness that allowed me to have
access to levels of reality beyond human
consciousness beyond the collective
psyche began there and entering into
archetypal reality and there I basically
I only spent about a year and a half at
that level I mean which is not much time
that's just a tip of the iceberg in a
way but I experienced out of two levels
of archetypal reality one which you
might think of as a more of a platonic
level I encountered beings phenomena
that were vast I mean they were just
huge I could not wrap my mind around
them I mean I just
they were just staggering that they are
that they were the forces of nature that
were responsible for creating time and
space and for orchestrating the events
that were taking place in time and space
and then did a lower level of
consciousness at what I would call a a
union level of consciousness I entered
into repeated experiences of
experiencing the the psyche of the human
species or the the literally the
collective unconscious how how the
system works that the human species
lives as a single entity psychologically
even physically that our minds are cells
within our our collective mind and our
bodies are cells within the collective
body of humanity I learned that our
healing of our individual diseases
contributes to a healing of those
conditions within the body of humanity
as a whole so it was just
over and over again being taken into the
dynamics of wholeness the wholeness of
our species and I think these these
experiences which are always there it
was like I was being educated one after
another first stabilizing at this level
going to another level going to another
level and I think these experiences were
teaching me what I needed to know in
order to receive the visions that came
later on where humanity is going the
birth of the future human the crisis
that were coming to in history what
that's all about
right you know I think what that really
shows too is the fractal nature of a
little bit of reality the different
levels being parts of the whole and it's
interesting you mention the entities is
something that we tend to associate with
DMT more than anything even though we
know from those experiences that yes you
have to die and it has to be death of
the self in order to open up to those
those larger rounds I just wanted to
acknowledge things I just noticed in my
notes um Kalindi EE
were you aware of his work I'm sorry say
again we were you aware of Kalindi EE
numeric wasn't when he was a large
advocate for 30 grams of dried mushrooms
Plus and he was injuring some very very
deep realms of psilocybin he passed for
his moon last week I just hurt my niacin
and sociologically before I before I
forgot no I'm afraid now did you have a
teacher during all of this
do you know practice a spiritual teacher
are well no I consider the universe my
only teacher see one of the things that
maybe is a little unusual about my
experiences compared to other people
I've talked to is that I didn't have a
lot of contact with
individual beings which are so common in
the dmt experience and I over time I've
really pondered why that was the case
and basically I kept being dissolved
into levels of being and then being
dissolved into deeper levels of being
and kind of opening up into vast
expanses of consciousness and vast
dimensions of and learning how the
universe works
but not in a way which engaged involved
engaging individual beings who live on
those levels and about the closest I
could come to encountering beings as
such like that is when I described
archetype of reality but these these
realities were so large I the best my
mind could do to image them was to image
them as galaxies I saw them as galaxies
billions and billions of light-years
wide they were so formed but in general
I mean I have had contact with beings
with psilocybin or with ayahuasca things
like that but the LSD work just kept
dissolving me into deeper and deeper
into being itself so that there was
always I would encounter an intelligence
and an intelligence would guide me and
orchestrate and teach me and talk to me
and it was an ever deepening cascading
deepening of this intelligence but I I
never had the sense of encountering are
experiencing discrete intelligences so
to me the universe is a is an infinite
potential and I experienced a dialogue
or rapport or dissolving into deeper and
deeper and deeper layers of this
infinite ocean
so I consider I mean I consider the
universe my teacher and the universe was
always there articulately at the other
end but the nature of the intelligence
that I was encountering kept changing
kept deepening as it went as it took me
deeper so it's I think there's a little
daring lots about LSD itself in relation
to the other compounds I think that
there is a kind of resonance between the
form of the substance of compounds or
plants and the experience to me iced tea
has always been a very human centric
experience from you know the the
therapeutic levels of the individual
self and the cleansing right through to
our place and the the largest cosmos we
can imagine but but as you noted it's
not about beings from other realms or
other realities or other dimensions it
seems to be very grounded in the human
psyche and what its infinitely capable
of and I don't know I would love to get
your thoughts on this whether there has
anything to do with the synthetic nature
of it being you know discovered by
Hoffmann in a laboratory as opposed to
occur in the deep jungles or burning
bush yeah well you know people a lot of
people have a lot of convictions around
the difference between synthetic
psychedelics inorganic relics yeah and I
don't really have a big investment in
that distinction I don't have enough
data points to really draw a lot of
conclusions but I would do have this
observation
substances
the longer humanity has worked with the
substance I think there are energetic
fields like Rupert Sheldrake's more for
genetic fields that develop around a
substance so when people have the
experience of encountering the ayahuasca
deity or the psilocybin deity I cannot
but think that in some ways the
substance the experience we had with
psilocybin or with ayahuasca which
humanity has been using for thousands of
thousands of years that there's a
certain way in which all of humanity's
experiences with this substance create a
feel surrounding this chemical so when I
take this chemical it's not just putting
a chemical into my body in some sense I
am opening myself to the field if he
managed his experience with this
substance LSD is a basically a new
substance it's a you know it's only a
few decades old and 60s and 70s is
nothing compared to the length of time
that human beings have been using
ayahuasca so I have always experienced
LSD to be a very clean substance in that
respect without a lot of cultural
baggage around it using it the way that
I did and to me it just it just shatters
me it dissolves my consciousness over
and over and over again and deeper and
deeper levels and takes me into
territory which felt kind of from an
evolutionary perspective it felt fresh
it there were places that I went that
did not feel like there were many
footprints on them from other human
beings and I don't have that experience
when I worked with psilocybin or with
ayahuasca where the those territory
filled more frequently traveled so to
speak well that's interesting that you
also know the experience of perceiving
the universe is feminine yeah for a
couple of reasons two reasons that I
talked about in the book
the first reason is simply because of
the tremendous love that the experience
of the universe triggered in me and just
awoke within me and the deep heartfelt
opening and the the depth of of passion
that I felt for the universe that was
taking me in that love which for me had
a feminine quality to it but the other
reason was about because of the specific
cosmology that emerged in my sessions
and this cosmology surprised me it
wasn't one that I had internalized or
taken in for many of the sources that I
had read and the cosmology basically
there was an experience a series of
experiences that took me back to the
beginning of creation back before the
Big Bang and I experienced the universe
as basically emerging out of this primal
oneness which you know the the oneness
becomes the two yin-yang and the
experience was that out of that
to one of those consciousness stayed
outside of time and space and stayed
intact and the other consciousness began
a journey of manifesting time and space
and manifesting everything that has
evolved in time and space since the Big
Bang and so the consciousness that
stayed outside in the entire evolution
area creation project felt more to me
that more quote masculine and the
consciousness which created felt more
feminine so that it felt congruent with
me - in - I had I just had repeatedly
the experience of the universe itself as
more feminine than masculine and I mean
I'd just has that quality to me so the
great mother lineage is very strong in
me I've always understood myself to be
deeply connected to the great mother
lineage as when I consider and many
cultures around the world as you and I
know yes yes being the great mother yeah
yeah I consider my work always in
service of the great mother
yeah as I noted earlier I got to I'm
just up to the point of deep time and
you boom yeah perhaps you could give us
a little insight into the nature of deep
time yeah and well early on in my work
when I entered into the ocean of
suffering during the cleansing part is
really really intense collective
cleansing when I would come through each
session I would be spun into a reality
that was so foreign to me that in the
beginning I I came back from the my
eleventh session and I couldn't remember
it I mean I mean I couldn't remember
where I had gone took me months to begin
to fully remember it and
what had happened is I entered what I
later came to call deep time for a year
in seventh a total of seven sessions I
experienced my life as a completed whole
start to finish all the days of my life
is a simultaneously present now and I
experienced the totality of my life
beginning to end that required that was
so hard for my mind to hold on to
because my mind is trained to operate
within linear conditions where time
flows one moment at a time but to
experience all of the moments of my life
as a simultaneous present it took
literally took me an entire year to
learn how to stabilize consciousness at
that condition I kept going back and
back and back into the same condition so
the universe was teaching me how to be
conscious at that condition in that
condition later I began to enter more
radical dimensions of time I entered not
personal deep time I entered
evolutionary deep time I had experiences
of there was an eternity
it wasn't timelessness that's a
different experience it was different
swathes of time it was I would
different patterns within time on a
scale of a hundred thousand years are
within a scale of a million years either
simultaneously present or in an
accelerated fashion so I could sometimes
I would experience centuries going by in
seconds but I was experiencing life in
terms of the rising and falling of way
of some generations just generations
coming and going generations after
generations in order to understand or to
be taught what was happening underneath
the evolutionary dance so I just
experience so many variations on time
that I came to call it deep time
different there deep time is entering
into a different modality of time
consciousness I I do think that there in
the universe there are multiple
envelopes of time multiple modalities of
time linear time is how the world
behaves inside times face but as you
move to the edges of space you move to
the edges of time and there between
linear time and timelessness where
you're outside of time altogether in
that intermediate domain there multiple
modalities of time and you can learn to
stabilize consciousness at those levels
of time and it seemed that the universe
wanted to teach me certain things and
the only way it could teach me certain
things was to teach me how to to stay
conscious in these unusual temporal
modalities in fact the the last of the
what I consider the great visions the
last of the great visions took place in
the 70th session and it was one of the
most extreme strip-down that I went
through in any of my sessions and it
moved me into the most radical
experience of deep time in all of my
sessions in fact after this vision the
universe basically wrapped it up the
next
three sessions that kind of wrapped up
our work together this was the dominant
vision and it took me far far into the
deep future into humanity's evolutionary
future yeah yes I was gonna ask you what
that that window of deep time into the
evolution of the human species what what
insights that gave you about our future
direction yeah
well starting at around the twenty third
session and repeating itself in a
punctuated way over the years the
universe kept on taking me into giving
me teachings about the human story it
was basically giving me the outline of
you what you might call the master story
and I apologize for the arrogance of
that concept I don't mean it as such but
it just kept taking me over and over
again showing me certain things about
humanity it kept emphasizing that we
were coming to a crescendo in our
evolutionary journey we were coming to a
turning point a true before and after
point and we're after thousands and
hundreds of thousands of years of
struggling and of course with
reincarnation I believe in reincarnation
my first book was on reincarnation I've
had lots of experiences around
reincarnation so when I talk about
humanity evolving for a hundred thousand
years I'm this within a reincarnation
alfredo genetic but a reincarnation
development it kept emphasizing that
humanity was growing coming to a turning
point in its larger evolutionary story
and it was a turning point that was so
decisive that we would mark history in
terms of the before and after of this
point and then in the 55th session it it
took me it it kept showing me that there
was a
a profound opening that was in the
process of emerging in the human heart a
profound change in the human psyche that
was taking place in history but it
didn't show me how it was going to
accomplish this it could it never showed
me how until the 55th session and at
that session it took me deep into the
future deep into deep time and it took
me into the death and rebirth of our
species it literally gave me an
experience not as Chris page but by this
time the boundaries of Chris base had
been shattered so many times in so many
ways it took me into how the species as
a whole was going to experience this
death and rebirth so that just as
individuals go through death and rebirth
and a mystic goes through the dark night
of the soul and then the birth and the
spiritual reality the entire human
species was going to go through a death
and rebirth process and it it gave me
that experience where we it just did we
went through a series this is a process
that takes generations to actualize but
a process where we it got so bad where
there was a falling apart a loss of
control a an unraveling of the
assumptions that we make in life and
wood just broke us down just like in a
psychedelic session when you die and are
reborn the entire species was going
through a loss of control a breakdown
and just when it looked like we would
all be dead just when it looked like we
were coming to an extinction event the
worst of it passed and we began to
emerge and pick ourselves up and go
forward and when we emerged a different
humanity was in its place something
happened in this death rebirth process
in this collective death rebirth process
so we were changed profoundly a
tremendous Oh
opening of the heart an opening of the
mind so that the humans that were coming
out of the other end this was a ship
that took place in the depths of the
collective psyche it wasn't taking place
at the surface of the individual psyche
this is a pivot at the core of the
collective unconscious and when this
pivot takes place all other heat all
subsequent human beings will be born
within the contracts or the matrix of
this changed collective psyche and it
really was literally I think an
Enlightenment of our entire species
death and rebirth and a spiritual
opening of our entire species later I
came to understand this in terms of what
I call the birth of the diamond Sol my
understanding of reincarnation is when
we die our consciousness expands into
deep spiritual reality and when we're
born we get small we become male/female
this that you know and then when we
excite we could dig when we're born we
get small it's like going to colleges
but when you go to college you choose
specific courses for the semester
that's your semesters work then at the
end of the semester you go on spring
break summer time then you get back
small Yin so you just over and over over
and over we get big we get small we get
big and we get small and if we keep this
up for a few hundred thousand years
sooner or later the large consciousness
which is the consciousness of the soul
the consciousness that holds all of our
experiences for all of our lifetimes
that consciousness which we'd naturally
return to when we die in the Bardo
condition that consciousness I think
awakens inside time and space and this
is what I call the birth of the diamond
soul we literally wake up to our entire
identity and our entire history inside
time and space so that we're no longer
even tenth
to think that our present body and the
little bitty consciousness of ego is our
true identity the soul wakes up on earth
and I think that's what's happening for
the entire human race the crises that
were experiencing that and we're moving
into with global systems crisis and the
global ecological crisis we're we're
experiencing the ending of a world that
was built by the ego in the ego as a
magnificent like a magnificent
phenomenon but ultimately it's it's cut
off from each other it's cut off from
itself it's cut off from the other
beings the culture that we're living in
is a culture that was built by the ego
and in order to solve the problems which
we are confronting in this generation in
this century we have to transcend ego at
consciousness we we can't solve these
problems at the level of ego at
consciousness and I think there's a
tremendous evolutionary drive for us to
give to wake up to our soul to that soul
reality and literally give birth to
stole consciousness inside time and
space and if we can imagine what it
would be like to have an entire species
that is awake to their sole reality and
now we're talking about a turning point
yeah in history and that's what I think
is happening I think we are entering a
process of labor and labor is a you know
a gestation lasts a long time
labor is fast and short very very
intense very very painful day humanity
has been just dating developing this
capacity of soul for thousands and
thousands and thousands of years I think
we are entering labor now this
tremendous unraveling this tremendous
pain of history that we are entering and
will continue to enter for decades still
is not an end on apocalypse it's not an
end of existence an end of life but it's
giving birth to the future human and I
think the future human
is the diamond soul yes apocalypses
revelation it's to lift the violin and
to reveal the hidden the unseen than you
so you get the feeling that this time is
now that this rebirth takes place I mean
when we look out at what's going on at
the moment it certainly feels like a
dramatic catharsis is taking place and
you know may they go it's like they're
forces of freedom and control are
dominating the battle and we can either
go in two directions you know you know
increasing you know control and
totalitarianism or increasing freedom
and autonomy and sovereignty and it's
interesting because I wonder how much
that is a sort of a grand narrative
collective story in the spiritual world
that because I hear it a lot from many
different circles they you know we are
birthing into the new age into the new
man and and yeah and that would be
absolutely beautiful if that was the
occasion and he is the case that yes the
painful birth that we need to go through
in order to transition into a better
more functional more balanced species
yeah so you know so yeah let me do that
right on there
well there's a chapter in the book
called the birth of the future human and
I discussed this in the chapter called
the Great Awakening in dark night early
dawn this book that I wrote in in 2000
and I go into a deeper in LSE in the
mind of the universe and the birth the
future human and I was comfortable going
into this territory because I'm not
comfortable with what some would call
his think of as historical speculation
and I had begun this work really
thinking in terms I was doing this work
for my individual healing my individual
transformation my individual
enlightenment
and that just got blown away you know
within a few years and everything
everything the work the purification the
accessing the information the knowledge
everything seemed to be in service of
the species as a whole that's it's like
that's what the divine is really
interested in right now not that our
species is special in the universe but
and but the scale of what the divine is
focused in on this planet is species
wide it's not so much individual species
wide and so this was repeated so many
times and so strongly that the entire
gist of my 20 year journey ended up
being focused on this collective story
of death and rebirth so I mean I have
deep convictions about I think we've
entered the dark night of our collective
soul we've entered the dark night which
is a period of purification we basically
are confronting in a very accelerated
manner the sins of the past we would say
the sins of our fathers except we were
our fathers we are our mothers you know
so reincarnation wise we're confronting
our history we're confronting the
choices that we've made in the
consequences of those choices and we are
purifying ourselves of the toxins left
over by those choices in order to open
ourselves up into new dimensions of our
being because when we when we open to
our soul it opens it has a too immediate
effects an enormous expansion of
compassion because we we have
relationship mean we haven't met each
before right you and I are new to each
other but how many times has your soul
in my soul you know it's different times
in history made contact and the people
that we have cut our friends and our
enemies and we have such a deep deep
history on this planet so when when you
wake up as a soul in a sense you wake up
to that history and it has the effect of
unleashing an enormous compassion for
not only human beings but all being for
all life-forms and then there is when
you wake up to that kind of depth it
also opens up a deeper experience of
communion with cosmic intelligence
because it's like the ego is operating
under a cloud of obstruction but when
the soul awakens then it's easier to
enter into conscious rapport with the
consciousness of the universe itself so
there is literally an awakening to
trends to transcended consciousness as
well as awakening to tremendous breadth
of consciousness that's where I think
we're heading yeah and I think you or
your um your description the ocean of
suffering of experiencing the pain of
every woman that at every that it ever
existed exemplifies that that when you
experience empathetically emotionally
with all the beans that you have been in
this model of reincarnation then that
bike scene has to lead to something
larger it has to you know resolve into a
higher level so when did you when did
you write dark night early dawn in
relation to to this ball game I wrote
dark at early dawn I wrote it in 95 96 I
stopped my work in 99 when I had already
entered the diamond luminosity years the
last five years of my work were centered
on what I call the time at the Manasa T
work but I deliberately when I wrote
dark and early dawn I deliberately
restricted myself for the most part to
analyzing only the sessions that emerged
in the first half of my journey I did
not discuss what was happening in the
second half I needed more time to digest
them so in Elysee in the mind of the
universe I go back to the very beginning
the whole structure of the book
just start in the first session taken
all the way through every chapter deals
with a certain number of sessions just
do it layer by layer this is where it
started this is where it went this is
where it ended so dark night early dawn
was written basically about
three-quarters of the way through the
journey itself okay that's interesting
because I had not read it and so I asked
what about seeing him was on write to
just throw some questions now about that
book which which he had read and no he
asked him a few actually um one that
stands out to me here is um as a teacher
of comparative religion your take on the
problem of theodicy the the problem of
reconciling a magnificent intelligence
with the radical examples of evil in
history in prison day is there is
allusion to the destructive phenotype
within human minds the the poem of
suffering and or some people would say
the problem of evil I don't use that
category because that's just a
theological interpretation of the
experience of suffering and pain you
know I think Rama Christian was right
Ramakrishna said if you want to
understand God you must be willing to
look suffering in the face because
suffering doesn't come from any
secondary source it's not a demonic you
know agency that you have to you have to
look deeply into the logic of the
universe and the logic of creation if
you want to understand how to reconcile
the intelligence of the universe and the
compassion of the universe with the fact
that existence hurts so much there's so
much pain and suffering here and I think
the key is understanding that creation
or evolution or the manifestation of
life we are very it's incomplete we're
not finished we are we're building
something
and and the what we are building is
something which is evolving and
developing over billions and billions of
years so the universe says we find it
now
and as we measured in the last ten
thousand years say it's just a drop in
the bucket compared to the billions of
years that preceded it and the billions
of years that come after it so it's
clearly there's a great deal of pain and
suffering in life as we experience in
its current form but we are evolving and
developing and becoming more
consciousness we're learning from our
choices we're getting more and more
control over our bodies in our mind and
we're going to keep this up not for
another couple of decades or a few more
hundred years or even a few thousand
years we're going for millions and
millions and billions and billions of
years so to me suffering the the scale
of suffering has to be understood or the
the logic of suffering has to be
understood not necessarily in terms of
just what has been accomplished up to
now but we have to understand that we
are in a process we are in developmental
process and it's an incomplete process
and so it's kind of like when you're
building a house and you just have the
stud walls up and you have the trusses
up but you don't have the roof on and
the rain comes and it gets wet because
there's no roof because you haven't
built the roof yet well humanity hasn't
achieved levels of capacity that would
allow us to stop the suffering and it's
and it's not because we're bad and it's
not because we're being forced or
manipulated by dark and demonic forces
it's just a radically incomplete process
we're trying to continue the process as
fast as we can now do you believe within
this model of yin and yang of their
being perfect balance and duel forces
throughout the universe that the
suffering is balanced equally by please
and good in the world that for every you
know starving child experiencing the
pain of hunger there is a person
experiencing the beauty of a sunset do
you think it exists in that kind of
balance I don't think so I don't think
so because that would mean if in a
long-term wise if we were ever going to
continue or deepen our joy we would be
deepening and continuing our suffering
and I don't think that's where we're
going necessarily I think we are you
know I asked my classes sometimes when I
was teaching if I draw a line on the
board and the evolutionary line and so I
would ask how far are we on the
evolutionary line
are we like 90% along this line well and
if you were 90% along the line then we
have a certain set of conclusions that
would seem to follow when we look at
life and try to understand it but what
if we're only one percent on this line
what if everything that we've developed
is really just a little bitty bitty bit
of this entire process then that opens
up the picture enormous Lee we're up
until just a few decades ago a few
hundred years ago yeah it opens up oh we
used to think the universe was 6,000
years old because we added up all the
agents yeah now we understand billions
and billions of years old just since
this first Big Bang and we don't know
whether they had been bangs before if
it's an expanding and contracting
universe it may have been there may have
been other universes that feed into the
intelligence of this manifestation of
this universe so the challenge here is
to is to engage and comprehend the scale
of the project that we are involved in
that are to put it a different way if
you want to speak within Devine terms or
is to understand the scale of the agenda
of the divine it's like we're literally
just children we only became self
conscious a few thousand years ago we
only
beneath the level of our individual
consciousness to discover the dimensions
of our mind which are universal
well maybe four or five thousand years
ago we're just beginning to wake up on
this planet and this planet has been
four-and-a-half billion years in the
making
13.7 billion years in the Gau galactic
scale of things and we're just waking up
we're just getting started here and so
it's not surprising from that
perspective and of course suffering is
the great great challenge I mean as you
say the children who are dying the
children who are suffering from hunger
the injustice is that that surround us
completely I'm not making light of any
of those things in saying this we have
to address those things we have to
expand and continue to work on those
things but philosophically we have to
thought of understand that we're just
beginning to wake up to the scale of the
universe that gave birth to us and is
continuing to give birth to us from that
perspective we have a lot of work to do
but we have a lot of hope I really do
think we're becoming a species of Christ
a species of Buddhas a species of the
Prophet we are becoming an entirely
higher order of species over time and
this is going to be what we're doing is
extraordinarily important this time in
history but very very hard work but when
we go through this process when we give
birth to the future human like a mother
who gives birth to a child when she
holds her child she doesn't forget to
pain but she knows that the pain was
worth it in order to deliver this child
and when we give birth to the future
human we will look back at all of the
suffering of all of history and we will
say it was worth it for where we are and
where we're going so so if I'm here at
the balanced rebalancing
and pain and joy as laid out on this
scale of deep time which which I recall
you you're referring to bhakti in
relation to that concept of you know
loving devotion and you know you know
leaving all beings of pain and
sufferings yeah yin yang yin yang is as
a an attempt by a particular culture to
articulate some of the deep structure of
the universe and to point to this primal
duality which then divides into the ten
thousand things becomes the ten thousand
things the complexity of the evolving of
life but I don't think I think we have
to be careful not to hang too much on
the primary polarity good/bad
male/female things like this but the
bhakti is a different issue and this was
a surprise to me but you know in
Hinduism therefore systems of spiritual
work for yoga's this Yana yoga the yoga
of meditation karma yoga the yoga of
action blanking on part of the bhakti is
the is the yoga of emotion it's loving
God it's becoming awakened through love
I had always been attracted to more the
mental forms a spiritual practice of all
the various yoga's and Hinduism I was
least attracted to bhakti the emotions
the cultivation of emotional
relationship with the divine and yet I
found in the psychedelic work bhakti was
activated bhakti was very powerfully
activated so that I had not only a
mental relationship with the universe
and a cognitive experience of the
universe but an overwhelmingly powerful
emotional connection to the universe and
experience of the universe so that it
just it became a love relationship and
that's why for me I mean everybody has
to do
their own vocabulary for the ultimate
reality but my vocabulary for ultimate
reality I call the absolute my beloved
the beloved just because if that's the
bhakti quality yeah I just my heart yeah
I've noticed that with with five him you
know when when everything is stripped
away and there is that zero point
singularity that everything is fused
into one point the only thing left is
love the only thing that can exist or
the only thing at least to exist is this
Universal love and it's it's quite
interesting I mean I guess from a neuro
reductionist perspective you can say
that it's because your serotonin
receptors of being completely flooded
yeah love is the quality of the the
experiential quality of awareness
oneness and love are two different sides
of the same coin
because when you dissolve into oneness
then instantly love is the experience
that the universe has for itself there
is no division in oneness so oneness is
all-embracing so we might experience
this as compassion our love but the
logic of love is the logic of oneness
everything short of oneness is
fragmented okay so would you agree with
this perspective that I see a lot less
like you like community there the
universe creates separation in order to
experience itself in order to experience
the you know the joy and the pain
because one has a night experience
itself alone yeah it's you know that it
really presses the question I mean when
we're asking the question why existence
why is there anything went when there
was the primal void when let's say to
use God language when the divine was
and complete in perfect equanimity
within itself why did it manifest the
universe knowing what would be involved
knowing all the pain and suffering that
was involved what was that about and one
of the proposals is well this is a way
of the divine knowing itself this is a
way of learning itself personally I've
always I've never found that very
persuasive I mean I understand it and I
think this is a truth to it but to me to
make creation an exercise in
self-knowledge I think that that never
had never was very satisfying to me
another aspect of it I think is that
creation is a way for the divine to
share its being so all of us from my
cosmology all of us are sparks of light
that emerge out of the primal light so
all of us are aspects of the divine
little bitty pieces broken off out of
the the primal one and those little
bitty pieces grow and grow and grow and
grow and as they grow and grow they're
actualizing their innate potential
they're actualizing their divinity and
in the end it is as if you have a one
light which is growing billions and
billions of light out of its own one
light so it's its sharing of its being a
cascading of the sharing of its being
which I'm sure is an inadequate model by
itself when I've asked the universe
simile and and and the full of the
universe being this diamond with
infinite facets each fashioning an
individual's human you know showing the
piece of life that is part of the whole
yeah yeah
and we always of course always have to
remind ourselves that what is he merged
up to this point in time is just the tip
of the iceberg it's just getting started
so we have to kind of imagine our
a million years from now which is
nothing in evolutionary time but a
million years from now what we might be
envisioning the answer to this question
to be what is the purpose of creation
why is why is this happening a million
years from now we're going to understand
it and have a much deeper answer to that
question and a million years after that
we're going to have a deeper answer that
question so I just there's a certain way
in which I caution closure on these
questions I'd rather be agnostic
somewhat open-ended I do think it has to
do with self knowledge self expression I
think it has to do with sharing nature
open up opportunities for life to breed
life life to grow life from we seems
very much seeking the moment we seen a
lot of people fall into the trap of
certitude of knowing there's some grand
design behind it all whether it be you
know in cinah sticker bales but and this
time monsoons and people seem to be
really struggling with with that and
looking for answers that that resolved
some kind of you know provide us energy
good luck yeah exactly
ya know when we dissolve into the
universe when we just die and die and
die and dissolve into the universe we
tap into this so all so many of us tap
into this condition where we experience
the intended nosov it we we experience
the the meaningfulness of existence and
we walk away come away with it saying
there is a plan there is a purpose there
is a project here but then when we try
to describe exactly what is the plan
what is the purpose I think we very
quickly reached the limits and and it's
the limits are simply the limits that
are built into our
evolutionary condition of this moment
for this species in this planet in this
evolutionary period I mean we literally
I don't think we have a brain big enough
to begin to comprehend
masu scale yeah so a certain we can feel
it we confirm it we get asserted but
closure is it's the one thing to decide
about nature now L sort of drive to find
the answers and pin them down you know
it's it's you know rather futile perhaps
that is what gets us into so much
trouble no certainly one of the things
you mentioned in dark night early dawn
homeowner Atticus yeah and and the
whites producing me antigens as you know
a condition for the evolution of
humanity genius well the concept of home
owner Atticus is simply a way of putting
language and and if different people
have different ways of languaging
homeless beer Alice the future human the
diamond soul this is just different ways
of articulating what I think is a very
very widespread collective intuition
perception and that is that that
humanity is growing into something new
that there is an evolutionary
development so we go from Homo habilis
homo what not Homo sapiens and there's
something after what we are now there's
something coming and we generate
different words for it but the and
certainly this is so strong in
psychedelic experience that we are an
unfinished species that we are
developmental species and we're and
we're not just getting we're not just
getting smarter or more compassionate in
incremental ways I think there are major
turning points where like the rules
change when we go through these
thresholds we are coming into a
bifurcation
point in history we either make it
across this threshold or probably go
extinct I personally believe that we
will make it across this threshold we
will make this jump and when we make
this jump however long it takes us
thousands of years hundreds whatever
however long it takes us that's not
going to be the end point that's just
going to be the new platform and we will
eventually reach the end of that
platform and we're gonna make a jump
into yet another because that's the
scale of what we're engaged in of what
we're involved in so how do you Eddie
see psychedelics as a catalyst and and
this moment obviously is a huge push for
them to be used only within the
medicalised model as therapeutic tools
with trauma and then there's you know
the proposal of modern-day mystery
schools which I personally think is
greatly under under focused yeah where
do you see them it's like he likes
playing a role in this well I understand
the in the psychedelic community the
very strong emphasis on demonstrating
the therapeutic effectiveness of
psychedelics yeah I think it's really
important that we that we not blow this
opportunity we have we kind of blew it
in 60s you know it blew up in our faces
we lost the right to use these things we
had to go underground to use them and
it's really important that we have this
new opportunity that we document things
that we demonstrate their effectiveness
and right now their effectiveness is
being demonstrated in their therapeutic
potential but if we do this if we keep
going it's only going to be a matter of
time before mainstream thinkers begin to
understand that the why is it that
psychedelics are so therapeutically
effective because they open up a
communion with the deeper with deeper
dimensions of mind and in the early
stages this encounter with the deeper
dimensions of our own on
our consciousness unconsciousness is
very cleansing it's very healing it's
very therapeutically efficacious can be
demonstrated but if we but that's just
the tip of the iceberg we go deeper we
go deeper we go deeper it opens off our
relationship to each other it opens up
our relationship to the planet other
life-forms it opens up a relationship to
spiritual reality personally I was
trained as a philosopher of religion
it's always been the philosophical
import of psychedelics which is
interested in me I'm not a clinician I'm
not a therapist I've always interested
in the philosophical or cosmological
opportunities and I think in that
perspective we're coming to a critical
moment in history and it's not enough
just to heal us at this moment in
history we have to heal not simply the
personal unconscious so that's important
it's very important but we have to heal
the soul we have to heal the fundamental
human condition we have and that means
recovering an understanding of what we
are who we are where we are
what existence is about and I think
psychedelics are coming at a you know
the rediscovery of psychedelics in
western industrial cultures because
indigenous cultures have had them you
know a long time but in this culture
where we have lost contact with the
deeper levels of our own psyche we've
lost contact with the consciousness of
the earth we've lost contact with the
consciousness of the creator of galaxies
psychedelics have this opportunity to
awaken us quickly draw us into an
awareness of this deeper dimension at
exactly the time when we need it because
we can't get through this period of
history with the limited understanding
of ourselves that have grown out of 19th
century science this materialist
mechanistic reductionistic understanding
which is just a it's an absolutely
devastating worldview to try to live in
you know that you that existence comes
into that we come into existence by
accident
it's all random it has there's no
meaning to it there's no meaning to our
individual challenges there's no meaning
to history that is an absolutely
devastating worldview and it leads to
the kind of planet that we have
developed now where we just basically
try to eat it all alive and get as many
experiences and as much of experience as
we can possibly because when we die it's
all over and it was all an exercise in
futility anyway well psychedelics and
help us understand that that's not true
it's a very different agenda it's almost
like they had the the perfect tools for
the human condition at this point in
time I really are and yeah it feels like
you know there is a grander scheme
playing out with their own essence and
how do you think we get so I get Alex or
what do you think is a good pragmatic
way to get psychedelics and field of
philosophy more well I think the
therapists have to do their work you
know they have that that's what's really
going to open the door they have to do
their work they have to study the
physiology of psychedelics they have to
demonstrate the therapeutic efficacy of
psychedelics but the mystery school
aspect the philosophical aspect that's
there I think that the key to opening to
this deeper dimension in mainstream
society if you're working at the fringes
of society the edges of society we're
already open to the mystery school use
of psychedelics but for mainstream
culture to begin to open to this
dimension of psychedelic work
I think the therapists have to lead the
way into it once we see that that's
being demonstrated then I think society
will be more open to the more exotic
qualities of psychedelics but we have a
lot of maturing to do there I mean we
have so many psychedelics which unleash
so many different experiences it's an
overwhelmingly complex maze if you go
from five Meo
to salvia divinorum psilocybin and Iowa
so many different experiences it takes a
huge expansion of our cosmology to
understand even to begin to understand
how all of these experiences can coexist
within a meaningful framework of a
deeper understanding of existence even
just to begin that understanding we have
to be highly motivated and I think the
therapists are the ones that are opening
that door for us I think you quite
understand is that these are these are
plants that have for whatever reason
evolved human neurotransmitters and that
the plants being much older than us and
the evolutionary scale of things almost
trying to you know teach us yeah a
simpler way of being one of a bit of
description but to look back throughout
you know historical lineage and perhaps
examine where we went wrong yeah yeah
where we went wrong again is we don't
blame a first grader for being first
being six years old you know it's just
like you know they didn't do anything
wrong
they're just six years old you know and
humanity you know we made mistakes we've
done dumbass things we've done this and
that the other terrible things but in a
larger sense
we're just young inexperienced not
understanding and because we didn't all
understand we make mistakes you know in
Eastern traditions I say the core
problem the core problem is not that
we're evil the core problem is that were
ignorant we literally don't know and
because we don't know we'd make bad
choices and because we make bad choices
those have bad consequences but the more
we understand and they so we can make
them say yeah I like the analogy okay
yeah I like the analogy of
don't judge a tree because it grew a
little bit this way because it didn't
get enough light from the other side it
just is it's just you know we accept but
much more usually than we do with people
yeah yeah yeah exciting times we live in
I want to ask I know we're coming to
sort of towards the end of the
discussion that I want to mention
something at the end the last chapter of
my book is called coming off the
mountain and I basically discussed what
happened when I stopped my sessions in
the years after I stopped the sessions
and I just want to mention that because
I think we're it's getting easier and
easier with the substances that are
available to us to break through
consciousness to break into intimacy
with the universe to break into
transcendence you know to excess
information my experience was when I
stopped my sessions in the years had
followed I thought that since I had been
given so many gifts and since I had been
had so many mystical experiences and so
many experiences of intimacy with the
being of existence and dissolving into
you know the primordial light of
existence I thought it would be easy to
stop my sessions and just step away and
I would be able to be nourished by those
experiences and what I found was that in
the end there was such a deep
existential longing to return to those
dimensions of existence and I might I
knew that I had to stop for reasons I
explained in the book I had to stop this
work I came to a point where it just I
knew I needed to stop and slow things
down and I knew when I stopped that I
would never go back into such intimacy
with the divine during my lifetime it
would only happen with
that I would return to such depth of
place and I found myself slowly entering
a conditioned world I was just waiting
to die I was you know taking care of my
children teaching my classes doing the
things that I do but in my heart of
hearts I was just waiting for this life
to be over so that I could return to the
full intimacy of the divine and in time
I began to realize this this is not
right
this is not the way this work is
supposed to end and I had been so
careful to integrate every session to
integrate all of my work as I went and
not get ahead of myself that I it wasn't
clear to me what where I had gone wrong
my life was screaming failure to
integrate but it wasn't clear how I
where I had failed to integrate because
I paid so much attention to integration
and I learned that integrating a session
is different than integrating an entire
journey and my journey had taken me so
deeply into transcendence that I had
thought of lost my footing in the world
of eminence it's all the divine the
physical world is the divine but I had
entered so deeply into the transcendent
divine that I had become I I was unlost
my footing inside the imminent divine
and it took years it took me about ten
years to get really grounded back in
space-time reality so that I could live
the remainder of my years with in the
joy of space-time reality and I mention
this because I think many people as we
have more experience of transcendence
we'd naturally want to go there or let
they are come in here more completely I
think it's really important to address
the issue of integration while we're
going into these states to integrate
integrate integrate and integrating a
journey is different than integrating
individual sessions it's a it's a really
delicate process and so I mentioned my
own mistakes
in order to encourage other people not
to make those mistakes right and thank
you for mentioning that that's that's
quite potent and after this goes to ear
the Australian psyche like society's
running a large integration workshop you
know and has the same before with people
having difficulty integrating say such a
feat experience like five and you know
their embodiment that eminence that
experience of the time in everyday life
and and the small things and being in
nature you know eating clean and just
looking after the presence rather than
constantly seeking this transcendent
experiences yo-yo - that's a beautifully
permanent way to surround the interview
half there's a couple of quotes that
really jumped out at me from the book
and I think one that fits quite well
here too is you said it's all too easy
to think that because we have had a deep
and profound experience we have become
deep and profound s elves this is a
fools delusion I think I may never yeah
drop that right yeah yeah the greatest
danger I think of working with
psychedelics as psychic inflation and we
can we can over value the temporary
experiences and undervalue and
undervalue the stable platforms of our
day-to-day consciousness it's in
Maslow's terms we can overestimate the
value of our peak experiences and
underestimate the value of Plateau
experiences so we can have a very very
profound spiritual experience on
Saturday and still be an on
Monday yeah yeah it's it's certainly
visible within you know some aspects of
this community yeah we're we're growing
abalone
yeah yeah if you have you happy to leave
it there Chris thank you so very very
much
on behalf of these strange so young
society and and everyone that's viewing
this thank you for your time pleasure to
have the conference thank you you've got
to have this conversation yeah I
recommend everybody read read that your
latest book and you very much yeah
that's not where we are' just can have
people get hold of the book well I've
just been told that Amazon isn't
delivering to Australia now so probably
the easiest way is through digital forms
Amazon one will you know deliver digital
forms okay I I'm very late in getting my
website up I don't it isn't finished yet
so it'll it'll be there within a couple
of months I hope so
easiest way to get it is through inner
traditions or through Amazon or other
booksellers and get it digitally if it's
not being mailed in the hardcopy
right Graham thank you that and stay
safe and these strange and interesting
times they think
thank you for your work one day I hope
maybe I'll be able to get to Australia
and Louise Rennison yeah and look
forward to having conversations with
your larger psychedelic society it'd be
a pleasure
absolutely yeah and we'd love to have
you speak it you know in the larger
conferences here if you feel so inclined
and if you believe you come out and
great very great thank you Chris
all the best